---
title: "Kotlin's hidden costs - Part 1"
date: 2021-11-14
categories: 
  - kotlin
image: "../../images/kotlin.webp"
tags:
  - kotlin
  - java
---

Kotlin is convenient, but I think the main thing that makes it convenient is that it has a lot of syntactic sugar. Compared to Java, which is the same JVM language, many people say that they are happy to see that the amount of code is dramatically reduced in many cases. However, behind this convenience there is a hidden cost (in terms of performance). I found a good article that explains this, so I would like to share it with you. However, please note that this is more of a summary than a translation.

By the way, the article introduced here ([Exploring Kotlin’s hidden costs - Part 1](https://bladecoder.medium.com/exploring-kotlins-hidden-costs-part-1-fbb9935d9b62)) was created in 2017 (when Kotlin was still 1.1), so now that it has been updated to 1.5, I think the situation may be slightly different due to compiler improvements, etc., but the content is of a high level, so I think it's worth reading through it at least once. It might also be interesting to directly compare the Kotlin Bytecode introduced in the article with the code generated by recent Kotlin.

Also, the article I am introducing this time is about `Part 1`, but there are also other articles about `Part 2` and `Part 3`, so I would like to introduce them one by one in the future. First, let's take a look at the part about lambda expressions and companion objects.

## Higher-order functions and Lambda expressions

For example, let's say we have defined the following function. It executes the passed parameters within a DB transaction and returns the number of rows in the execution result.

```kotlin
fun transaction(db: Database, body: (Database) -> Int): Int {
    db.beginTransaction()
    try {
        val result = body(db)
        db.setTransactionSuccessful()
        return result
    } finally {
        db.endTransaction()
    }
}
```

The above function can be used as follows by passing Lambda.

```kotlin
val deletedRows = transaction(db) {
    it.delete(“Customers”, null, null)
}
```

Kotlin can be used with Java 1.6 JVM, but Java 1.6 JVM does not support Lambda. Therefore, in order to maintain compatibility, Kotlin supports Lambda (also anonymous functions) by creating an object called `Function`.

## Function object

Now, let's take a look at what the actually compiled Lambda (body) looks like as Java code. (Here, we are using the `Decompile` function of `Show Kotlin Bytecode` of Intellij/Android Studio)

```java
class MyClass$myMethod$1 implements Function1 {
    // $FF: generated method
    // $FF: bridge method
   public Object invoke(Object var1) {
      return Integer.valueOf(this.invoke((Database)var1));
   }

   public final int invoke(@NotNull Database it) {
      Intrinsics.checkParameterIsNotNull(it, "it");
      return it.delete("Customers", null, null);
   }
}
```

As you can see, when using Lambda (an anonymous function), the compiled result basically means that three or four additional methods are generated. Instances of `Function` objects added here are created only when needed. Precisely, it works as follows.

- If value capture is used, an instance of `Function` is created every time a parameter is passed, and it is subject to GC.
- If there is no value capture, `Function` is instantiated as a Singleton and can be reused.

In the previous code, there is no value capture, so the Lambda caller will be compiled as the following code.

```java
this.transaction(db, (Function1)MyClass$myMethod$1.INSTANCE);
```

However, if you repeatedly call a higher-order function with value capture, performance may decrease due to GC.

## Boxing overhead

Java 1.8 and later versions that support Lambda try to avoid boxing/unboxing as much as possible by providing multiple `Function` interfaces. However, when compiled with Kotlin, it utilizes generics.

```kotlin
/** Function that accepts one argument */
public interface Function1<in P1, out R> : Function<R> {
    /** Accepts an argument and executes the function */
    public operator fun invoke(p1: P1): R
}
```

What you can see from these is that when calling a function passed as a parameter in a higher-order function, if that function has a primitive type value (parameter or return value), boxing/unboxing will occur. In the Lambda compiled earlier, you can see that the return value is boxed as `Integer`.

A higher-order function that takes Lambda as a parameter that uses a primitive type has a cost that you don't need to be aware of if the number of references is small, but if it is not, it can be assumed that there is an impact on performance.

## Inline function

Fortunately, Kotlin provides a keyword called `inline`. This allows you to inline higher-order functions. When inlined, the contents of `Function` are directly included in the calling code and compiled. Therefore, if it is inlined, performance can be improved in the following ways.

- Function object instance is not created
- Boxing/unboxing does not occur for functions that use primitive types
- Method count does not increase (in the case of Android, there is a limit to the number of methods that an app can reference)
- No increase in function calls (you can expect performance improvements for code that is highly CPU-dependent and is called frequently)

Let's check the code when it is inlined. You can see that the `transaction` function has disappeared and it is calling `db.delete` directly. You can also see that the return value `result` is also a primitive type from the Wrapper class.

```java
db.beginTransaction();
try {
   int result$iv = db.delete("Customers", null, null);
   db.setTransactionSuccessful();
} finally {
   db.endTransaction();
}
```

However, when using the `inline` keyword, you must consider the following:

- Inline functions cannot call themselves directly or be called by other inline functions.
- Public inline functions defined in a class can only be accessed by public functions and fields of that class.
- Compiled code is larger (larger if referenced repeatedly)

It is better to inline higher-order functions as much as possible, and copy long code blocks to non-inline functions if necessary. Also, in places where performance is important, you can consider inlining the called function.

## Companion object

In Kotlin, classes cannot define static fields or methods. You are supposed to use `companion object` instead.

## Access private fields of a class from companion object

Let's say we have an example like below.

```kotlin
class MyClass private constructor() {

    private var hello = 0

    companion object {
        fun newInstance() = MyClass()
    }
}
```

When the above code is compiled, `companion object` becomes a Singleton class. Therefore, it is necessary to make the private field of the class accessible from the external class, which means that the compiler will additionally generate `getter` and `setter`. The generated method will be referenced from `companion object`. See below.

```text
ALOAD 1
INVOKESTATIC be/myapplication/MyClass.access$getHello$p (Lbe/myapplication/MyClass;)I
ISTORE 2
```

In Java, it was possible to restrict access by `package` to avoid this, but Kotlin does not have such a keyword. `getter` and `setter` are basically generated even when using `public` or `internal`. Also, these methods are instance methods, which cost more than static methods. Therefore, it is best to avoid changing field access restrictions for optimization purposes.

If `companion object` frequently accesses the fields of a class, you can consider caching the field values ​​to avoid calling this hidden method.

## Access constants of Companion object

In Kotlin, static constants within a class are generally defined in `companion object`.

```kotlin
class MyClass {

    companion object {
        private val TAG = "TAG"
    }

    fun helloWorld() {
        println(TAG)
    }
}
```

At first glance, the code looks simple and nice, but in the case of Kotlin 1.2.40 or earlier, the code behind it is quite dirty.

### For Kotlin 1.2.40 and earlier

When accessing private constants defined in `companion object`, the above (using `getter`) will occur.

```text
GETSTATIC be/myapplication/MyClass.Companion : Lbe/myapplication/MyClass$Companion;
INVOKESTATIC be/myapplication/MyClass$Companion.access$getTAG$p (Lbe/myapplication/MyClass$Companion;)Ljava/lang/String;
ASTORE 1
```

This is not the only problem. The generated method does not return an actual value, but instead calls the generated `getter` as an instance method.

```text
ALOAD 0
INVOKESPECIAL be/myapplication/MyClass$Companion.getTAG ()Ljava/lang/String;
ARETURN
```

If the constant is `public`, you can access it directly, but you will still access the value through the `getter` method.

And to store the constant value, the Kotlin compiler generates a `private static final` field in the class that has it, rather than `companion object`. Furthermore, in order to access this field from `companion object`, another method will be generated.

```text
INVOKESTATIC be/myapplication/MyClass.access$getTAG$cp()Ljava/lang/String; 
ARETURN
```

After this long journey, we finally get to read the values.

```text
GETSTATIC be/myapplication/MyClass.TAG : Ljava/lang/String; 
ARETURN
```

In summary, if you are using Kotlin 1.2.40 or earlier versions:

- Call static method from `companion object`
  - Call instance method from `companion object`
    - Call a static method of a class
      - Read value from static field

This can be expressed in Java code as follows.

```java
public final class MyClass {
    private static final String TAG = "TAG";
    public static final Companion companion = new Companion();

    // Generated method
    public static final String access$getTAG$cp() {
        return TAG;
    }

    public static final class Companion {
        private final String getTAG() {
            return MyClass.access$getTAG$cp();
        }

        // Generated method
        public static final String access$getTAG$p(Companion c) {
            return c.getTAG();
        }
    }

    public final void helloWorld() {
        System.out.println(Companion.access$getTAG$p(companion));
    }
}
```

It is possible to generate lower cost Bytecode, but it is not easy.

First, you can eliminate method calls by defining compile-time constants using the `const` keyword. However, in Kotlin this is only possible for primitives or Strings.

```kotlin
class MyClass {

    companion object {
        private const val TAG = "TAG"
    }

    fun helloWorld() {
        println(TAG)
    }
}
```

Alternatively, you can consider a Java approach using `@JvmField`. By doing this, `getter` and `setter` will not be generated and you will be able to access the fields directly. However, since `@Jvm`-based annotations are for compatibility with Java, you should consider whether this is a good method. And this method is only possible for `public` fields.

In the case of Android development, this seems to be an effective method only if you implement the `Parcelable` object yourself. For example, like below.

```kotlin
class MyClass() : Parcelable {

    companion object {
        @JvmField
        val CREATOR = creator { MyClass(it) }
    }

    private constructor(parcel: Parcel) : this()

    override fun writeToParcel(dest: Parcel, flags: Int) {}

    override fun describeContents() = 0
}
```

A final option is to aim for Bytecode optimization using tools like [ProGuard](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/shrink-code) or R8.

### For Kotlin 1.2.40 or later

Starting with Kotlin 1.2.40, the values defined in `companion object` are still stored in the main class, but they can now be accessed directly without creating and calling methods. This can be expressed as Java code as follows.

```java
public final class MyClass {
    private static final String TAG = "TAG";
    public static final Companion companion = new Companion();

    public static final class Companion {
    }

    public final void helloWorld() {
        System.out.println(TAG);
    }
}
```

Also, as mentioned above, if there is no method in `companion object`, if you use ProGuard or R8 tools, the class itself will disappear and be optimized.

However, methods defined in `companion object` cost a little more. Since the fields are stored in the main class, accessing private fields defined in `companion object` will still go through the generated methods.

## Finally

This time I just read an article written by someone else, but it was quite educational. Especially for me personally, when I was using intellij, there were times when I was bothered by the warning that I should use the `inline` keyword, but now I can understand it a little better. Regarding the story about `companion object`, although the problem has now been resolved, I am now reflecting on myself for not thinking about it and thinking, ``It's a constant, so it's `companion object`.'' There will be a lot of interesting content in subsequent articles, so I would like to introduce them at another time.

See you soon!
