---
title: "A story about the Lombok bug"
date: 2019-08-12
translationKey: "posts/java-lombok-annotation-bug"
categories: 
  - java
image: "../../images/java.webp"
tags:
  - lombok
  - java
---
[Last post](../java-design-pattern-builder/) introduced `Lombok` along with the Builder pattern. It has many useful functions, such as being able to create not only Beans, but also Immutable classes [^1] and Builders, as well as being able to specify various options with annotations (such as specifying field access levels), and allowing you to add required methods. However, this time I found a bug-like phenomenon while using Lombok, so I would like to post about it.

## Where the bug occurred

Before I explain where the bug occurred, I would like to first introduce what Lombok annotations I use and what their functions are. This is because in this case, I am using a combination of two or more Lombok annotations, and there may be others who use Lombok with the same combination as me and experience the same bug.

Lombok's `@Builder` can be attached with the `(toBuilder=true)` option. Using this, you can basically create a new instance by calling a static method, and you can change some values ​​from an already existing instance and regenerate it into a different instance. Expressed in code, it looks like this:

```java
// Create a new instance using only @Builder
House house2 = House.builder().type("wooden").build();

// Recreate from an existing instance with changed values using the toBuilder option
House house3 = house2.tobuilder().type("block").build();
```

And while using the Builder, there are some fields in the original class that you want to pass to the Builder as default values. In other words, if you don't want it to be null. In my case, it was List. When an instance is generated, I wanted to be able to initialize the List, use a builder to assign the List itself, or create a method like `addList()` to add individual elements.

To achieve this, it was necessary to initialize List in the original class and pass it to the builder in that state. With Lombok annotations, you can do this by adding `@Builder.Default` to the field. And only implement `addList()`-like methods that are not generated by Builder annotations. Expressed in code, it looks like this:

```java
@Builder(toBuilder=true)
public class Wallet {

    // Do not want this to be null when the instance is created through the builder
    @Builder.Default
    List<String> cards = new ArrayList<>(); 

    // Declaration for adding a custom method to the builder
    public class WalletBuilder {

        // The original builder can only assign the whole List, so add a method that can append individual elements
        public WalletBuilder addCard(String card) {
            this.cards.add(card);
            return this;
        }
    }
}
```

The expected movements in this implementation were as follows.

```java
// Add to the List while creating the instance
Wallet myWallet = Wallet.builder().addCard("Apple Card").build();

// Add to an existing instance
Wallet newWallet = myWallet.toBuilder().addCard("American Express Card").build();
```

However, when we actually tested it, a bug occurred due to these two annotations.

## So what kind of bug is it?In an existing instance (without any List operations), `add` worked as expected, but when creating an instance and `add` at the same time, NPE[^2] occurred. When I looked into the location, an exception occurred at `this.cards.add(card);`, so it seems that I was trying to add an element to an object that had not been created. In other words, List is not initialized properly.

I did a little research and found [issue on Github](https://github.com/rzwitserloot/lombok/issues/1347). It was written in 2017, so it feels quite old now, but when I read it, it was similar to what I'm experiencing now. Moreover, there was a story that the issue was resolved with the `1.18.2` version of Lombok, but the version I am currently using is `1.18.8`. I don't know if the problem was supposed to be resolved, but it didn't work as expected, or if it recurred after updating the version, but in any case, the same phenomenon was occurring.

## Solution

So how should I solve it? There may be other methods, but in my case I was able to solve the problem by not using both `toBuilder=true` and `@Builder.Default`. The latter becomes meaningless as soon as the field is not properly passed to the Builder. In the case of `toBuilder`, only two methods are added, so we made sure to pass the values ​​by hand. Modifying the `Wallet` class presented above in this way results in code like the following.

```java
// Do not use the toBuilder option
@Builder
public class Wallet {

    // Do not use @Builder.Default
    List<String> cards = new ArrayList<>();

    // Also implement the toBuilder method manually
    public WalletBuilder toBuilder() {
        return new WalletBuilder().cards(this.cards);
    }
}
```

Now, as originally expected, a properly initialized List is passed when creating an instance. Congratulations!

## Lesson learned?

Using libraries to reduce the amount of code and automate it is important in terms of improving productivity, but since it is impossible to know where bugs will occur in code written by humans (it may be used in unexpected ways), sometimes it is safer to write reliable code even if it takes a lot of effort. Especially in this case, if I had not given up on the annotations and tried to fix the code, I may not have been able to avoid the bug no matter how long it took. In that sense, I think this incident was a good learning experience.

If there are people reading this post who are thinking about implementing something similar to me, I would be happy if you could refer to it and know that something like this might happen. See you soon!

[^1]: A class whose value cannot be changed midway through once an instance is generated. This is the case with String. When you assign a value, the value stored in memory is discarded and a new value is generated.
[^2]: Null Pointer Exception, also called null point. The object you are trying to reference is not in memory, and this is the most common exception to encounter in Java.
