---
title: "Kotlin's hidden costs - Part 2"
date: 2021-11-21
translationKey: "posts/kotlin-hidden-cost-2"
categories: 
  - kotlin
image: "../../images/kotlin.webp"
tags:
  - kotlin
  - java
---

This time it's another post about Kotlin's hidden costs. Nowadays, you may not worry about it so much (although it seems necessary to verify it, it seems difficult to keep track of the code generated by the compiler every time it is updated...), and although we are now in an era where it is better to increase the machine specs than to do extreme tuning, I think it would be a good idea to acquire the things introduced in this article as a habit of coding.

Last time, I introduced articles about higher-order functions, Lambda, and companion objects. This time I will talk about Kotlin's hidden costs in local functions, null stability, and Varargs. This article summarizes the contents of [Exploring Kotlin’s hidden costs - Part 2](https://bladecoder.medium.com/exploring-kotlins-hidden-costs-part-2-324a4a50b70).

## local function

A function defined within a function is called a "local function." These local functions can access the range of the outer function (the function in which the local function is defined). For example, in the following, you can see that `sumSquare` is accessing the parameters of `someMath`.

```kotlin
fun someMath(a: Int): Int {
    fun sumSquare(b: Int) = (a + b) * (a + b)

    return sumSquare(1) + sumSquare(2)
}
```

Local functions are basically similar to Lambda, but with other limitations. Local functions themselves and functions containing local functions also cannot be defined as `inline`. So there is no way to avoid the cost of calling the function.

Compiled local functions are turned into `Function` objects. That means they have the same problem as the "Lambda that is not inlined" mentioned in the previous article. If the above code is expressed in Java code, it will look like this:

```java
public static final int someMath(final int a) {
   Function1 sumSquare$ = new Function1(1) {
      // $FF: generated method
      // $FF: bridge method
      public Object invoke(Object var1) {
         return Integer.valueOf(this.invoke(((Number)var1).intValue()));
      }

      public final int invoke(int b) {
         return (a + b) * (a + b);
      }
   };
   return sumSquare$.invoke(1) + sumSquare$.invoke(2);
}
```

However, there is one point where performance does not deteriorate compared to Lambda. Since the instance of the function is known to the caller, it becomes an anonymous class and methods can be called directly without using a generic interface. This means that `casting` or `boxing` will not occur when calling a local function from an external function. The actual Bytecode is as follows.

```text
ALOAD 1
ICONST_1
INVOKEVIRTUAL be/myapplication/MyClassKt$someMath$1.invoke (I)I
ALOAD 1
ICONST_2
INVOKEVIRTUAL be/myapplication/MyClassKt$someMath$1.invoke (I)I
IADD
IRETURN
```

Here, the method is called twice, and you can see that both the method arguments and return value are of type `int`, and there are no `boxing` and `unboxing`.

However, the `Function` object is still instantiated every time the method is called, but you can avoid this problem by replacing the local function with one without a value capute.

```kotlin
fun someMath(a: Int): Int {
    fun sumSquare(a: Int, b: Int) = (a + b) * (a + b)

    return sumSquare(a, 1) + sumSquare(a, 2)
}
```

By doing the above, the `Function` object instance will be reusable. This way, the only disadvantage of local functions compared to existing private functions is that they generate additional classes (including methods).

Local functions have the advantage of being able to access the variables of the outer function as an alternative to private functions. However, this incurs the cost of generating a `Function` object, so it is necessary to devise a non-capturing method.

## Null safety

One of Kotlin's best features is the ability to explicitly distinguish between types that can be null and types that can't. This prevents the compiler from throwing unexpected `NullPointerException` at runtime.

## Checking for non-null parameters at runtime

For example, suppose you have a function like the following.

```kotlin
fun sayHello(who: String) {
    println("Hello $who")
}
```

This is the Java code as shown below.

```java
public static final void sayHello(@NotNull String who) {
   Intrinsics.checkParameterIsNotNull(who, "who");
   String var1 = "Hello " + who;
   System.out.println(var1);
}
```

The `@NotNull` annotation has been added to inform the Java side that null should not be passed.

However, the annotation does not force null safety on the caller. So I call the static method and check the parameters again. This function throws `IllegalArgumentException` to make it easier for the caller to fix it.

`Intrinsics.checkParameterIsNotNull()` checks for non-null parameters are always added to public functions, but not to private functions. This is because the compiler guarantees that Kotlin classes are null safe.

This null check has a negligible performance impact and is useful for testing, but it does cause the build to take more time. For this, you can eliminate the runtime null check by adding `-Xno-param-assertions` to the compiler options or by adding the following settings to the [ProGuard](https://www.guardsquare.com/proguard) rules.

```java
-assumenosideeffects class kotlin.jvm.internal.Intrinsics {
    static void checkParameterIsNotNull(java.lang.Object, java.lang.String);
}
```

However, when adding the above rule, it is first necessary to check whether the Android ProGuard Optimization setting is enabled. This setting is disabled by default.

## Nullable primitive type

The first thing to remember is that primitive types declared as nullable always use Java's `boxed reference` types such as `Integer`, `Float`, etc. instead of `int`, `float`, etc., which incurs additional costs.

Since Java ignores [autoboxing](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/language/autoboxing.html) and null-safety, the code does not change much between `Integer` and `int` in Java, whereas Kotlin forces you to write code that is safe against nullables, so you can clearly see that it is better to use non-null.

```kotlin
fun add(a: Int, b: Int): Int {
    return a + b
}

fun add(a: Int?, b: Int?): Int {
    return (a ?: 0) + (b ?: 0)
}
```

Therefore, it is better to choose non-null, considering code readability and performance as much as possible.

## array

Kotlin has three types of arrays:

- Things like `IntArray`, `FloatArray`: arrays of primitive types. Compiles to types like `int[]`, `float[]`.
- `Array<T>`: Array with type of non-null objects. `boxing` can occur for primitives.
- `Array<T?>`: An array with the type of nullable objects. `boxing` clearly occurs.

If you need a non-null primitive type array, use `IntArray` instead of `Array<Int>` if possible.

## Varargs

In Kotlin, it is written a little differently than in Java, but you can define [varargs](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/functions.html#variable-number-of-arguments-varargs).

```kotlin
fun printDouble(vararg values: Int) {
    values.forEach { println(it * 2) }
}
```

Like Java, `vararg` is compiled into an array of the specified type. And the above function can be called in three ways as follows:

## Pass multiple parameters

```kotlin
printDouble(1, 2, 3)
```

Kotlin's compiler turns this into creating and initializing a new array. This is the same as Java.

```kotlin
printDouble(new int[]{1, 2, 3});
```

This means there is an overhead to creating a new array. However, it is the same method as Java.

## pass an array

In Java, you can pass arrays as is, but in Kotlin you can't do that and you need to use `spread operator`.

```kotlin
val values = intArrayOf(1, 2, 3)
printDouble(*values)
```

In Java, array references are passed to functions as `as-is` and no new array allocation occurs. However, Kotlin's `spread operator` does something like this:

```java
int[] values = new int[]{1, 2, 3};
printDouble(Arrays.copyOf(values, values.length));
```

This is safer code because a copy of the array is passed to the function. This allows you to modify the array without affecting the caller. However, it consumes additional memory.

## Mix and match arrays and other arguments

The good thing about `spread operator` is that you can also pass arrays and other arguments mixed together.

```kotlin
val values = intArrayOf(1, 2, 3)
printDouble(0, *values, 42)
```

Are you wondering how it is compiled in this case? The results are quite interesting.

```java
int[] values = new int[]{1, 2, 3};
IntSpreadBuilder var10000 = new IntSpreadBuilder(3);
var10000.add(0);
var10000.addSpread(values);
var10000.add(42);
printDouble(var10000.toArray());
```

In addition to creating a new array, we also use a temporary builder object to calculate the final size of the array. Therefore, the cost is more than when passing an array.

Therefore, for code that is called frequently and where performance is important, it is better to use actual arrays as parameters rather than variable-length arguments.

## lastly

How was it? Personally, I use private functions a lot, so I wanted to actively use local functions because the scope could be more restricted, but it was interesting to learn that there was a hidden cost here as well. This was the case with Java for primitive types, so I thought `boxing` would occur somehow, but it was interesting to see that it only happened for nullable types. On the other hand, there was a new question about how checks would be performed for non-null types that remain primitive. (For example, if `int` is used, the default value `0` will always be assigned.)

Also, in the case of arrays, Java also had `IntStream`, `DoubleStream`, etc., so I was able to understand it quickly, but I never thought that various costs would be added to the parameters passed with `varargs`. In the first place, I don't use arrays very often, so I haven't had a chance to use variable-length arguments, but it seems like it's easier to forget something important if you don't use it often, so I need to keep this in mind. I learned a lot.

See you soon!
