---
title: "Ideas for making instances Immutable"
date: 2019-08-25
translationKey: "posts/java-thoughts-of-immutable"
categories: 
  - java
image: "../../images/java.webp"
tags:
  - design pattern
  - java
---

You do not often see this in full-fledged object-oriented languages like Python, but Java has primitive types in addition to reference types. I think this may be because Java was introduced when object orientation was still relatively young. Because of primitive types, some people argue that Java is not fully object-oriented.

The definition of primitive types seems to be slightly different depending on the language, but the only one I know is Java, so from Java standards, a primitive type is a term that refers to a data type that is not an object. And that means that the perspective of how to hold data stored in memory is different from objects. An object points to an "address" where data is located in memory, whereas primitive types store data in separate memory areas.

The proof is in the operators used in conditional statements. `==` compares two primitive values to see whether they match. The same approach cannot be used for objects, with `String` being the most common example. If you do not use `equals()`, you cannot compare exact values with strings. This is because an object holds a memory address, so even if you intend to store the same value, the address referenced by each object may differ.

In this way, memory issues are quite important for programming. No matter how much the absolute value of memory increases, if you make a mistake in how you refer to or handle the data stored in memory, your program may not work as expected. What is also important is not only how to refer to the data stored in memory, but also how to manage it. If you intend to enter accurate data, but it changes midway through, the program may not work properly even if the references are correct.

In that sense, I would like to talk about Immutable classes this time.

## What is an Immutable Object?

Simply put, an Immutable Object is an object whose data does not change once an instance is generated. Conversely, objects whose data may change even after the instance is created are called mutable. Bean is a typical Mutable class. Data can be changed freely through setters. A typical Immutable class is String. Even if you assign a value to a String, the original data remains in memory until it becomes the target of the Garbage Collector, and only the memory address pointed to by the String object changes.

As mentioned earlier, if the data held by an object changes mid-program, stable operation cannot be guaranteed. And in a multi-threaded environment, if two objects refer to the same memory address, the thread itself may stop. If such a situation occurs, it is difficult to find out where the problem occurred. To avoid such problems, when creating an Immutable class, make sure that the data does not change after the instance is created, and that the data in the class does not refer to the same memory address.

Now, let's take a look at some ways to create Immutable classes.

## Don't use setters

Lately, I have been using Lombok quite a lot, and since it generates fairly standard code, I would like to explain this topic using code generated by Lombok annotations. For an introduction to Lombok itself, see [the previous post](../java-design-pattern-builder/).

Lombok allows you to easily generate beans by adding annotations. By adding `@Data` above the class, you can easily create setters and getters. If you use this method, it is more stable and requires less code than writing the method directly by hand, so you can use it proactively.

However, the fact that a setter is created means that the object is not Immutable. The following is an example of the code actually generated by adding `@Data`.

```java
// With @Data
public class Car {

    // Define only the fields
    private String name;
    private String color;

    // The following methods are generated automatically
    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return this.name;
    }

    public void setColor(String color) {
        this.color = color;
    }

    public String getColor() {
        return this.color;
    }
}
```

If this happens, a setter can change the value at any time unless the field is protected by `final`. And if some setter methods are not used, there is a chance that some fields will never be set and will become `null`. That does not fit the definition of immutable.

Fortunately, Lombok provides annotations for creating immutable classes. One of them is `@Value`. Using it, you can create an immutable class with similar behavior to `@Data`, although the way instances are created and field values are specified is different. The code using this annotation is as follows.

```java
// With @Value
public class Car {

    // Define only the fields
    private String name;
    private String color;

    // The following methods are generated automatically
    public Car(String name, String color) {
        this.name = name;
        this.color = color;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return this.name;
    }

    public String getColor() {
        return this.color;
    }
}
```

Initially, when creating an instance, specify all fields as arguments in the constructor. If there are many fields, it will be difficult to know which one is which, but there is no possibility of forgetting to specify a field value. And since there is no setter, the fields cannot be changed once the instance is created.

The good thing about `@Value` is that it works with the builder pattern. By adding `@Builder`, you can clearly see what each field looks like when creating an instance. However, the builder pattern does not require values for every field, so you may need to customize the `build()` method by hand. In that sense, it is a bit like an override. In code, it looks like this:

```java
@Value
@Builder
public class Car {

    private String name;
    private String color;

    // Generate only the following code
    public static CarBuilder {

        // Throw NPE if any field is null
        public Car build() {
            if (this.name == null) {
                throw new NullPointException();
            }
            if (this.color == null) {
                throw new NullPointException();
            }
            return new Car(this.name, this.color);
        }
    }
}
```

In this case, the code becomes complicated, and as the number of fields increases, you will have to deal with it again. If the field is also `List`, you will also need to perform a null check in the loop. As you can see, the code is more complicated than when using only `@Value`, so you need to consider which option to choose between convenience and safety.

## final declaration

There are times when you have no choice but to use beans. For example, there may be cases where it is okay for a field to be null. Or perhaps it would be better to take some measures, such as checking for null in the method that processes the bean.

When using beans, it is common practice to declare fields as `private` to prevent direct access from outside. Fields declared `public` can be accessed anywhere and their values may change without you noticing. To prevent that, the usual approach is to avoid direct field access and instead set values through setters and read them through getters.

We would like to say that we have ensured a minimum level of safety by specifying the value without directly accessing the field using the Setter method, but that is not actually the case. This is because the field's value can still change any number of times. If you enter a value using a setter and then read the setter again, the value of the field in the bean will be overwritten.

To prevent this, you should use `final` for the field. Fields declared `final` are more stable because their values are not reassigned after initialization. Another benefit is that errors are easy to spot, because assigning to a `final` field produces a compilation error.

Also, if all fields are declared final, the `@Data` annotation generates essentially the same code as the `@Value` annotation. Of course, in some cases you can have fields that are not final. The code in that case would be as follows. This may be necessary in some cases!

```java
// With @Data
public class Car {

    // Only color is final
    private String name;
    private final String color;

    // The following methods are generated automatically
    public Car(String color) {
        this.color = color;
    }

    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return this.name;
    }

    public String getColor() {
        return this.color;
    }
}
```

However, you must be careful that only the fields of this class are final. The data used when creating the Car object will be fixed and cannot be updated.

## shallow copy and deep copy

Another problem with setter methods is that if you copy an object, using the setter to change the value of the destination object will affect the source. Let's say you have created a simple code like the following.

```java
// Car class using @Data
Car car1 = new Car();
car1.setName("My car");
car1.setColor("red");

// My friend bought the same car as mine
Car car2 = car1;
car2.setName("Your car");

// Print the result
System.out.println(car1);
System.out.println(car2);
```

When you compile and run this command, you can see that `name` has become `Your car` for both Cars. Why did this happen? Earlier you said that String is Immutable.

This is because the code that was written with the intention of copying only the value of `car1` to `car2` actually ended up being code that says that `car1` and `car2` "reference the same memory address." Since the value is referenced from the same address, changing the value at that address will affect both.

In this way, objects change only by reference, so it can no longer be said that each object is independent just by assignment. This is different from primitive types, which store the value itself and are therefore safe for assignment. A situation like this where only the object's "reference" changes is called a "shallow copy."

As you might have guessed from what we've seen so far, we'll probably need to separate object references. If the references are independent, changing one value should not affect the other. When we say that a reference is different for each object, we mean the same thing as creating a new object in memory with the same value. And this is called a "deep copy."

There are various methods for deep copying. The first step is to create a new field object. For example, there are methods like the following.

```java
// Create an instance and assign values
Car car2 = new Car();
car2.setName(new String(car1.getName()));
car2.setName(new String(car1.getColor()));

// Change the values
car2.setName(new String("Your car"));
```

If you try the same output, you can see that only the value of `car2` has changed this time. However, it is not very convenient to do this for all fields. Is it not possible to make it into a method somewhere?

The easiest way is to use the interface. By inheriting `Cloneable`, you can easily clone objects. However, you will need to create a method.

```java
@Data
public class Car implements Cloneable {

    private String name;
    private String color;

    // Create a clone method
    public Car clone() throws CloneNotSupportedException {
        return (Car) super.clone();
    }
}
```

This will allow you to make deep copies in the following way:

```java
try {
    car2 = car1.clone();
    car2.setName("Your car");
} catch (CloneNotSupportedException e) {
    e.printStackTrace();
}
```

However, there are some things to be aware of when using this method. Defining `clone()` in a class does not guarantee deep copying of all fields. If a bean class is defined as a field, for example `Engine` within a `Car` class, that field may become a shallow copy. To avoid this, the `Engine` class must also inherit from `Cloneable`. It is as below.

```java
@Data
public class Car implements Cloneable {

    private String name;
    private String color;
    // Added field
    private Engine engine;

    // Make the field deeply copied as well
    public Car clone() throws CloneNotSupportedException {
        Car car = (Car) super.clone();
        car.engine = this.engine.clone();
        return car;
    }
}

@Data
public class Engine implements Cloneable {

    private String name;
    private String cylinders;

    // Create a clone method
    public Engine clone() throws CloneNotSupportedException {
        return (Engine) super.clone();
    }
}
```

How should I clone List or Map? Also, from the point of view of cloning objects, both methods are similar. It's a clone using a loop. For example, you can clone using the following method.

```java
// Copy the List
List<Car> carList1 = new ArrayList<>();
List<Car> carList2 = new ArrayList<>();
for (Car car : catList1) {
    carList2.add(car.clone());
}

// Copy the Map
Map<String, Car> carMap1 = new HashMap<>();
Map<String, Car> carMap2 = new HashMap<>();
for (Entry<String, Car> entry : carMap1.entrySet()) {
    carMap2.put(entry.getKey(), entry.getValue().clone());
}
```

Now you can create an Immutable class and copy it.

## Things to be careful about with Immutable classes

As introduced in [the Reflection post](../java-reflection/), you can use reflection to access fields directly, and you can even make private fields accessible. In other words, even if you create an immutable class, you can still change field values using reflection.

And creating an Immutable class also means that memory usage will increase. New objects are constantly being created, and each one takes up memory. Of course, modern machines have memory that can withstand the creation of a few objects, and the GC is active, so it's generally not something to worry about.

## Be careful with Singleton class variables

This is related to immutability, but when creating the [Singleton class](../java-design-pattern-singleton/) introduced earlier, you need to be careful about the fields the class contains. Once an instance is created, the same instance is used until the application terminates, so it would be dangerous if field values could still be changed. The result can vary depending on the process. To avoid that, you should block the possibility of field changes from the beginning by minimizing fields in the singleton or declaring them `final`.

## lastly

Personally, I think that if the beginning of programming is ``how to make it happen,'' the completion of programming is ``how to make it stable.'' Of course, techniques to improve performance and simplify maintenance and repair are important, but the most difficult thing is to create a program that operates stably. The more requirements you have, the more complex your code and the more likely you are to encounter exceptions. Creating an Immutable class is a step toward avoiding such exceptions, so I think it's important knowledge in terms of creating reliable programs.

I would like to continue to learn and acquire this kind of knowledge!
